>> Ifill: NETANYAHU'S BIG
VICTORY.
WHAT ISRAEL'S ELECTION RESULTS
MEAN FOR RELATIONS WITH THE U.S.
AND PLANS FOR FUTURE PEACE.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: D I'ANM JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
NEW QUESTIONS OVER THE VALUE OF
BIOPSIES TO DETECT BREAST
CANCER.
>> Ifill: PLUS, WHY HIGH WAGES
AND A LOW COST OF LIVING MAKE
THE TWIN CITIESNE O OF THE BEST
PLACES FOR YOUNG PEOPLE TO
SUCCEED IN THE U.S.
>> GIVEN THE FACT THAT
MINNEAPOLIS, ST. PAUL AS AN
EXCEPTIONAL RECORD NOT ONLY
ON BUILDING INCOME, BUILDING
WEALTH BUT SHARING WEALTH
AND CREATE CREATING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR UPWARD
MOBILITY, WE SHOULD PAY MORE
ATTENTIONS TO CITIES LIKE IT
IF WE WANT TO REPLICATE THAT
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: AND, THE LAST
CROSSING OF THE LUSITANIA.
A NEW BOOK CHRONICLES THE
PASSENGER SHIP'S FINAL VOYAGE
THROUGH THE PERILOUS WATERS OF
WORLD WAR ONE.
>> THERE IS SO MUCH
FANTASTIC ARCHIVAL MATERIAL
THAT IT SEEMED TO OFFER AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR ME TO PUT ON
MY ALFRED HITCHCOCK HAT AND
REALLY MAKE IT A KIND OF
EXERCISE IN NONFICTION
SUSPENSE
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
TORISES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE FEDERAL RESERVE
BOARD OPENED THE DOOR TODAY TO
RAISING INTEREST RATES, AFTER
YEARS OF RECORD LOWS.
THE CENTRAL BANK'S LATEST
STATEMENT DROPPED THE WORD
"PATIENT" IN DESCRIBING ITS
ATTITUDE TOWARD THE ECONOMY.
BUT IT ALSO SAID THE JOB MARKET
HAS TO IMPROVE, AND INFLATION
HAS TO MOVE CLOSER TO 2%, BEFORE
ANY RATE HIKE.
FED CHAIR JANET YELLEN:
>> TODAY'S MODIFICATION OF OUR
GUIDANCE SHOULD NOT BE
INTERPRETED TO MEAN THAT WE HAVE
DECIDED ON THE TIMING OF THAT
INCREASE.
IN OTHER WORDS, JUST BECAUSE WE
REMOVED THE WORD PATIENT FROM
THE STATEMENT DOESN'T MEAN WE'RE
GOING TO BE IMPATIENT.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET, THE
FED'S STEMETANT SIGNALED AN
INTEREST RATE HIKE MAY NOT BE
IMMINENT AFTER ALL.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 227 POINTS TO GET BACK
ABOVE 18,000.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 45, AND THE S&P
500 ADDED 25.
>> Woodruff: TERROR ROCKED
TUNISIA TODAY, AS GUNMEN
KILLED AT LEAST 20 PEOPLE, MOST
OF THEM WESTERN EUROPEAN
TOURISTS.
IT HAPPENED AT THE NATIONAL
BORDO MUSEUM IN TUNIS.
IN ADDITION TO THE DEAD, SOME 50
PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED.
SECURITY FORCES STORMED THE
MUSEUM ABOUT TWO HOURS AFTER THE
ASSAULT, AND RESCUED A NUMBER OF
HOSTAGES.
OFFICIALS SAID TWO GUNM WEENRE
ALSO KILLED, BUT TWO OR THREE
OTHERS ESCAPED.
>> Ifill: U.S. OFFICIALS NOW
ACKNOWLEDGE A PREDATOR DRONE
LIKELY WAS SHOT DOWN OVER SYRIA
YESTERDAY.
THE REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
REPORTED THAT DEVELOPMENT TODAY.
LAST NIGHT, SYRIAN STATE TV
BROADCAST WHAT IT SAID WAS
WRECKAGE OF THE DRONE.
THE SYRIAN MILITARY SAID AIR
DEFENSES IN A WESTERN REGION
BROUGHT DOWN THE UNMANNED CRAFT.
>> Woodruff: IN SERBIA, FOR THE
FIRST TIME, POLICE HAVE ARRESTED
SUSPECTS ACCUSED OF TAKING PART
IN THE 1995 MASSACRE IN
SREBRENICA.
EIGHT MEN ARE ACCUSED OF KILLING
MORE THAN 1,000 BOSNIAN MUSLIMS.
BOSNIAN SERB LEADERS HAVE
ALREADY BEEN ARRESTED AND TRIED.
BUT SERBIA'S DEPUTY WAR CRIMES
PROSECUTOR SAID THE ARRESTS OF
THE ACTUAL EXECUTIONERS MARKS A
MILESTONE.
>> ( translated ): I CANNOT TALK
ABOUT THE SUSPECTS, BUT THE
VICTIMS OF SREBRENICA HAVE NOT
BEEN FORGOTTEN.
THE PERPETRATORS HAVE NOT BEEN
FORGOTTEN AS WELL.
SEVERAL OTHER PEOPLE THROUGHOUT
THE REGION ARE POTENTIAL
PERPETRATORS OF THIS CRIME AND
THEREFORE I BELIEVE THIS STORY
IS NOT OVER YET.
>> Woodruff: IN ALL, SOME 8,000
MUSLIMS WERE KILLED AT
SREBRENICA, IN EUROPE'S WORST
ATROCITY SINCE WORLD WAR TWO.
>> Ifill: POLICE IN JAPAN ARE
INVESTIGATING DEATH THREATS MADE
AGAINST U.S. AMBASSADOR CAROLINE
KENNEDY AND THE AMERICAN CONSUL
GENERAL ON OKINAWA.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAY THE THREATS
CAME IN A SERIES OF PHONE CALLS
TO THE U.S. EMBASSY IN TOKYO.
KENNEDY HAS BEEN AMBASSADOR
SINCE LATE 2013.
>> Woodruff: SOME 10,000 ANTI-
AUSTERITY PROTESTERS RALLIED
TODAY IN FRANKFURT, GERMANY.
THEY CAME TO TARGET THE EUROPEAN
CENTRAL BANK, AS IT OPENED ITS
LAVISH NEW HEADQUARTERS.
>> ( translated ): I THINK THAT
THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK IS A
BIG SYMBOL FOR MONETARY POLICY
IN EUROPE, AND FOR THE POWER
POLITICS OF CAPITALISM HERE.
AND IT IS SIMPLY VERY IMPORTANT
THAT LOTS OF PEOPLE FROM LOTS OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES COME
TOGETHER AND FIGHT AGAINST THESE
POLITICS.
>> Woodruff: THE DEMONSTRATIONS
BEGAN PEACEFULLY ENOUGH, BUT
TROUBLE BROKE OUT WHEN
SOME IN THE CROWD SET FIRE TO
POLICE VEHICLES AND STARTED
THROWING STONES.
POLICE DETAINED 350 PEOPLE.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
A MAJOR PROTESTANT DENOMINATION,
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH U.S.A.,
HAS GIVEN FINAL APPROVAL TO
RECOGNIZING GAY MARRIAGE.
A MAJORITY OF THE CHURCH'S LOCAL
LEADERSHIP BODIES VOTED TO
EXPAND THE DEFINITION OF
MARRIAGE TO INCLUDE "A
COMMITMENT BETWEEN TWO PEOPLE."
THE CHANGE TAKES EFFECT ON JUNE
21.
>> Woodruff: THE 2016 REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL FIELD HAS A
POTENTIAL NEW ENTRANT: DONALD
TRUMP.
THE BUSINESSMAN AND STAR OF TV'S
"THE APPRENTICE" ANNOUNCED TODAY
HE'S FORMALLY CREATING A
COMMITTEE TO EXPLORE RUNNING.
TRUMP ALSO EXPRESSED INTEREST IN
RUNNING IN 2012, BUT ULTIMATELY
DECIDED AGAINST IT.
>> Ifill: AND, FOR THE SECOND
YEAR IN A ROW, THE GOVERNMENT
SET A RECORD IN 2014 FOR
WITHHOLDING INFORMATION.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTS THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION CENSORED OR
DENIED ACCESS TO MORE FILES THAN
EVER, UNDER THE FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION ACT.
IN ADDITION, THE BACKLOG OF
UNANSWERED REQUESTS UNDER THE
LAW GREW 55%.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
TENSIONS AND QUESTIONS AFTER
NETANYAHU CLAIMS VICTORY IN THE
ISRAELI ELECTION.
THE POLITICAL SNARE THAT HAS
STALLED A BILL TO STOP SEX
TRAFFICKING IN THE U.S.
WHY SCIENTISTS ARE QUESTIONING
THE USE OF BIOPSIES TO FIND AND
TREAT BREAST CANCER.
HOW THE TWIN CITIES ATTRACT THE
YOUNGER GENERATION WITH JOBS AND
REASONABLE COST OF LIVING.
AND, EXPLORING THE MYSTERIES
BEHIND THE LUSITANIA'S FINAL
VOYAGE.
>> Ifill: ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU BEAT BACK A
CENTER-LEFT CHALLENGE LAST
NIGHT, SCORING AN UNEXPECTEDLY
STRONG REELECTION VICTORY THAT
THREW FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN PEACE TALKS
INTO DOUBT.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MARTIN
SEEMUNGAL IS IN ISRAEL AND
REPORTS ON THE  MIXED REACTION
TO THE NEWS IN THE REGION AND
BEYOND.
>> Reporter: AFTER HIS
SURPRISING, CLEAR-CUT VICTORY,
NETANYAHU TOOK TIME FOR AN
AFTERNOON PRAYER AT JUDAISM'S
HOLIEST SITE, THE WESTERN WALL,
IN JERUSALEM.
>> ( translated ): I WILL DO
EVERYTHING I CAN TO CARE FOR THE
SECURITY AND WELFARE OF ALL
ISRAELIS.
>> Reporter: THE MAN NOW SET TO
SERVE A RECORD FOURTH TERM AS
PRIME MINISTER SOUGHT TO STRIKE
AN INCLUSIVE TONE, AFTER WHAT
HAD BEEN A DIVISIVE RACE.
ACCORDING TO "JERUSALEM POST"
REPORTER GILL HOFFMAN, NETANYAHU
RAN:
>> A PANICKING CAMPAIGN.
HE TRIED TO MAKE ISRAELIS FEEL
THAT THEY ARE IN TROUBLE, AND
THAT THEY NEED HIM.
>> Reporter: INITIAL EXIT POLLS
SHOWED THEY NEEDED BOTH
NETANYAHU AND HIS TOP
CHALLENGER, ISAAC HERZOG.
THEY WERE IN A DEAD-HEAT.
BUT THROUGH THE NIGHT, AS THE
ACTUAL COUNTING BEGAN,
NETANYAHU'S LIKUD BLOC RACKED UP
MORE SEATS.
"TOO CLOSE TO CALL" BECAME A
ROUT, LEAVING ISRAELIS DEEPLY
DIVIDED.
>> I CAN SAY IS ALL OF MY
FACEBOOK IS FULL OF PRETTY SAD--
PRETTY SAD COMMENTS; THEY CAN'T
>> WELL, I VOTED FOR THE LIKUD
SO I WENT TO BED QUITE HAPPY BUT
I WOKE, I WAS PARTYING WHEN I
SAW THE RESULTS.
>> Reporter: NETANYAHU IS ALMOST
>> Reporter: THE MAIN
CHALLENGER, ISAAC HERZOG, OF THE
CENTER-LEFT "ZIONIST UNION"
PARTY, SAID TODAY HE WILL SIT IN
OPPOSITION AND NOT JOIN A
GORNMEVENT OF NATIONAL UNITY.
>> ( translated ): I WOULD LIKE
TO MAKE IT CLEAR TO THE ISRAELI
PEOPLE, THE CHALLENGES ARE THE
SAME CHALLENGES, THE PROBLEMS
ARE THE SAME PROBLEMS, NOTHING
HAS CHANGED.
>> Reporter: AMONG PALESTINIANS,
THE SAME WORDS-- NOTHING HAS
CHANGED-- BUT WITH FAR DIFFERENT
MEANING.
>> THERE IS NO DIFFERENCE
( translated ): SETTLEMENTS
BUILDINGS AND EXPANSIONS, THEY
WILL DO WHAT'S GOOD FOR THEM AND
NOT FOR US.
>> Reporter: THE PALESTINIANS
WOULD LIKE TO SEE EAST JERUSALEM
AS THE CAPITAL OF A PALESTINIAN
STATE, BUT IN THE LAST DAY OF
THE CAMPAIGN, BENJAMIN NETANYAHU
MADE IT CLEAR THERE WILL BE NO
PALESTINIAN STATE IF HE IS
REELECTED.
THAT INSISTENCE LED TO GRIM
PREDICTIONS:
PALESTINIAN LEGISLATOR MUSTAFA
BARGHOUTI:
>> ISRAEL MUST BE TREATED AS THE
APARTHEID SYSTEM WAS TREATED IN
SOUTH AFRICA AT ONE POINT IN
TIME.
>> Reporter: AND THIS, FROM
ANALYST MOHAMMED DARAWSHE, A
PALESTINIAN CITIZEN OF ISRAEL:
>> IF THEY GO ON A COLLISION
TRACK, IT PROBABLY MEANS
THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS OF MORE
PALESTINIAN CASUALTIES IN THE
STREETS.
AND THEY'RE GOING TO CONTINUE
THEIR STRUGGLE TO HAVE A STATE.
>> Reporter: STILL, GILL HOFFMAN
THINKS NETANYAHU DOES HAVE ROOM
FOR MANEUVER, EVEN NOW.
>> IF THE SITUATION ARISES THAT
WOULD ENABLE THERE TO BE
MOVEMENT FORWARD ON THE
PALESTINIAN FRONT, NETANYAHU
WILL MOVE FORWARD.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. RESPONSE
TO NETANYAHU'S VICTORY ELECTION
HAS BEEN COOL SO FAR.
STATE DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN JEN
PSAKI SAID TODAY HIS WORDS OVER
THE LAST DAYS HAD NOT GONE
UNNOTICED.
>> BASED ON THE PRIME MINISTER'S
COMMENTS, THE UNITED STATES IS
IN A POSITION GOING FORWARD
WHERE WE WILL BE EVALUATING OUR
APPROACH WITH REGARD TO HOW BEST
TO ACHIEVE A TWO-STATE SOLUTION.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THE
PRESIDENT HIMSELF TOLD AN
INTERVIEWER:
'[T]HE WINDOW IS CLOSING FOR A
PEACE DEAL THAT BOTH... CAN
ACCEPT... WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT
IT GETS HARDER BY THE DAY.
WHAT WE ALSO KNOW IS THAT ISRAEL
HAS BECOME MORE ISOLATED
INTERNATIONALLY.
AND FOR NOW AT LEAST, THE
ELECTION RESULTS HAVE LEFT THE
FRACTIOUS RELATIONS BETWEEN MR.
OBAMA AND NETANYAHU, NO CLOSER
TO WARMING.
>> Ifill: AND MARTIN JOINS ME
NOW FROM TEL AVIV.
WE SPOKE ABOUT THIS TIME
YESTERDAY, THERE WERE EARLY
EXIT POLLS THAT SUGGESTED
THAT NETANYAHU MIGHT PULL
THIS OUT BUT NOT BY THIS
MUCH OF A MARGIN.
SO WHAT IS THE MOOD TODAY
AMONG HIS SUPPORTERS AND THE
PEOPLE WHO WANTED TO DEFEAT
HIM?
>> WELL, A VERY MIXED MOOD.
A REAL REFLECTION OF THE
DIVISION IN THIS COUNTRY.
ON THE ONE HAND YOU HAVE
LIKUD SUPPORTERS EUPHORIC, A
GREAT DEAL OF RELIEF.
BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO REMEMBER
THAT GOING INTO THE ELECTION,
THE DAYS BEFORE, ALL THE
POLLS WERE SAYING THAT I
WILL COUP WAS NOT GOING TO
DO-- LIKUD WAS TO THE GOING
TO DO THAT WELL.
IT WAS GOING TO POLL AT
LEAST TWO TO THREE SEATS
BEHIND ISAAC HERZOG'S CENTER
LEFT COALITION.
AND AS A RESULT, THERE WAS A
GREAT DEAL OF FEAR AMONG
LIKUD SUPPORTERS THAT THEY
ACTUALLY WEREN'T GOING TO
MAKE IT.
SO WHEN THAT FINAL RESULT
CAME OUT THIS MORNING, THEY
WERE-- THEY WERE STUNNED.
THEY WERE EXTREMELY U
NOR-- EUPHORIC THAT THIS HAD
HAPPENED.
ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU HAVE
THE ZIONIST COALITION, THE
CENTER, CENTER LEFT PEOPLE
WHO WERE, TO USE THE WORDS
THAT WE HEARD ON THE STREET
TODAY, SHOCKED, DEVASTATED.
THEY THOUGHT THEY HAD A REAL
SHOT AT IT THIS TIME BECAUSE
OF PERCEPTION THAT
NETANYAHU'S POPULA
DROPPING, WAS PLUMMETING AND
THAT, IN FACT, MOST ISRAELIS
WANTED TO SEE THAT CHANGED.
>> AND WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT
COALITIONS, THAT IS PART OF
THE CONVERSATION THAT IS
STILL UNDER WAY AT THIS
POINT.
HOW MUCH, OR HAS IT EVEN
BEGUN, THE COALITION
BUILDING THAT HAS TO HAPPEN
FOR THIS GOVERNMENT TO START
WORKING AGAIN?
>> WELL, THERE IS A LOT OF
CONVERSATIONS GOING ON, BUT
NOTHING HAS REALLY STARTED
PRACTICALLY.
WHERE WE'RE AT RIGHT NOW IS
NETANYAHU HAS SAID THAT HE
WILL FORM A COALITION OR TRY
TO PUT ONE TOGETHER IN THE
NEXT TWO TO THREE WEEKS.
THE WAY IT WORKS IS ALL THE
PARTY LEADERS GET TOGETHER.
THEY RECOMMEND SOMEBODY TO
THE PRESIDENT, WHO WILL BE
THE PERSON THEY WOULD LIKE
TO SEE TO BE PRIME MINISTER.
NOW WE KNOW THAT ISAAC
HERZOG SAID HE'S NOT GOING
TO SERVE IN A NETANYAHU
UNITY GOVERNMENT.
HE SAYS RESERVE IN
OPPOSITION SO IT LOOKS LIKE
IF NETANYAHU IS GOING TO PUT
THIS COALITION TOGETHER
WHICH EVERYONE EXPECTS, IT'S
GOING TO BE THE JEWISH HOME
PARTY ON THE RIGHT.
ALSO SOME OF THE RELIGIOUS
PARTIES.
AND OF COURSE MOREI, THE
FORMER MINISTER IN
NETANYAHU'S PARTY WHO LEFT
TWO YEARS AGO, FORMED HIS
OWN PARTY, GOT TEN SEATS AND
IS NOW THE FOURTH LARGEST
PARTY OR FIFTH LARGEST PARTY
IN THE POLLS.
SO HE HAS ASKED FOR THE
JUSTICE MINISTRY, MANY
PEOPLE SAW HIM AS A
KINGMAKER, IF IT WAS GOING
TO BE A CLOSE RACE.
NOW THAT IT'S CLEAR,
NETANYAHU IS GOING TO BE THE
ONE FORMING THE GOVERNMENT.
EVERYONE EXPRESSED THAT
MOREI WILL BE THE FINANCE
MINISTER IN A NETANYAHU
GOVERNMENT.
>> MARTIN SEEMUNGEL FOR US
TONIGHT IN TEL AVIV, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON WHAT
NETANYAHU REMAINING IN POWER
MEANS FOR ISRAEL, PROSPECTS FOR
A PALESTINIAN STATE, AND THE
AMERICAN-ISRAELI RELATIONSHIP,
I'M JOINED BY FORMER ISRAELI
AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED STATES,
ITAMAR RABINOVICH.
SHIBLEY TELHAMI, THE ANWAR SADAT
PROFESSOR OF PEACE AND
DEVELOPMENT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND AND AUTHOR OF THE BOOK
"THE WORLD THROUGH ARAB EYES."
AND ROBERT SATLOFF, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE WASHINGTON
INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY.
AND BACK TO THE RABINOVICH,
I WANT TO GET YOUR SENSE,
YOUR REACTION TO WHAT
HAPPENED YESTERDAY AND WHY?
>> WHAT HAPPENED WAS THAT
DESPITE TALK ABOUT
SOCIOECONOMIC ISSUES
HAPPENING AMONG THE YOUNG
MIDDLE CLASS, THE DOM
NATIONAL ISSUE REMAINS
SECURITY, ISRAELIS ARE
WORRIED.
THEY LOOK AT IRAN, THEY LOOK
AT GAZA, THEY LOOK AT
HEZBOLLAH IN LEBANON, THEY
LOOK AT THE COLLAPSING
STATES AROUND US, AND
MR. NETANYAHU DID A MUCH
BETTER JOB THAN MR. HERZOG
IN PORTRAYING HIMSELF AS THE
LEADER WHO CAN LOOK AFTER
THE SECURITY OF THE STATE
AND OF THE INDIVIDUAL
CITIZENS IN THE STATE.
HE DID ALSO OUTFLANK THE
RIGHT WING PARTY.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE BREAKUP
OF THE VOTE, THERE WAS NOT
SO MUCH A SHIFT FROM THE
LEFT TO THE RIGHT, BUT A
SHIFT INSIDE THE RIGHT WING
CAMP.
AND SO THEY WERE SUCCESSFUL
IN-- MR. BENNETT AND
MR. LIEBERMAN AND-- HIS OWN
LIKUD PARTY.
AND OF COURSE HE'S A CON SUM
AT COMPLAINING.
-- ER AND DID A VERY GOOD
JOB IN COMING UP FROM A LOW
POSITION TO THE VICTORY OF
LAST NIGHT.
>> Ifill: BOB SATLOFF DID HE
JUST OUTCAMPAIGN HIS
OPPOSITION?
AND WHAT DOES THAT MEAN IF
HE DID?
>> WELL, PRIME MINISTER
NETANYAHU IS AN
EXTRAORDINARY POLITICIAN,
THIS IS NOT THE FIRST TIME
THAT ISRAELIS WENT TO BED
THINKING SOMEONE ELSE WON
AND WAKING UP AND BEBE WAS
THE WINNER.
HE KNOWS HOW TO PULL THE
RINGS, ESPECIALLY AMONG
THE CENTER RIGHT AND THE
RIGHT.
THIS TIME HIS MAIN TARGET
WERE NOT UNDECIDEDS.
HIS MAIN TARGET WERE PEOPLE
FURTHER TO THE RIGHT THAN HE
IS, TO PULL THEM INTO HIS
LIKUD PARTY.
HE DID IT IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF DAYS.
ACTUALLY BOTH MAIN CAMPS
PANICKED.
HE PANICKED WITH HIS LAST
MINUTE DECLARATION ABOUT NO
PALESTINIAN STATE.
AND THE CENTER LEFT PANICKED
BY ESSENTIALLY DROPPING THE
RUNNING MATE OF THEIR NUMBER
ONE CANDIDATE, THAT SHE
WOULD NOT BE THE CANDIDATE
FOR PRIME MINISTER.
HIS GAMBIT WORKED BETTER.
AND HE GOT MORE VOTES FOR
HIS OLD PARTY TO MAKE HIM
NOT JUST ABLE TO PUT
TOGETHER A COALITION BUT
DWARFING ALL OTHER PARTIES.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK SHIBLEY
TELHAMI ABOUT THAT.
WHETHER THAT WAS DESIGNED,
HE NOT ONLY TALKED ABOUT
THERE WOULD BE NO TWO-STATE
SOLUTION IF HE WERE
RE-ELECTED, BUT HE ALSO
TWEETED THAT THERE WERE A
LOT OF ARABS GOING TO THE
POLLS.
AND THEY TRIED TO STIR HIS
BASE UP.
WAS THAT BY DESIGN?
>> WELL, WHETHER IT WAS BY
DESIGN OR NOT, IT CLARELY,
WHETHER HE REALLY PANICKED
OR NOT, HE USED IT FOR SURE.
NO QUESTION THAT HE USED THE
NUMBERS TO HIS ADVANTAGE.
WHEN THERE WAS A REPORT JUST
ON THURSDAY AND FRIDAY THAT
HE IS BEHIND ON THE POLLS,
THAT HE COULD ACTUALLY, YOU
KNOW, THAT EVEN THE ISRAELI
PUBLIC STARTED SAYING, IT'S
NOT INEVITABLE THAT BEBE IS
GOING TO BE PRIME MINISTER.
HE USED THAT.
WHETHE B
NOT, HE USED IT VERY
EFFECTIVELY.
I MUST SAY, I DON'T THINK IT
WAS ABOUT ISSUES, NOT EVEN
SECURITY ISSUES.
I THINK CLEARLY HIS FOCUS ON
SECURITY WAS DELIBERATE TO
TAKE AWAY FROM ASSOCIATIONS.
I THINK THIS WAS ABOUT
IDENTITY POLITICS.
HE WENT FOR COMMUNAL
IDENTITY, FOR ISSUES THAT
ARE IMPORTANT TO CORE
IDENTITIES OF HIS
CONSTITUENTS.
HE PLAYED ON THEM.
HE WANTED TO RAISE THE LEVEL
OF PARTICIPATION IN THE
ELECTIONS.
80% OF THE SETTLERS
PARTICIPATED IN THEIR
ELECTIONS.
SO HE CLEARLY USED THE ARAB
ISSUE, YOU KNOW, WHAT "THE
NEW YORK TIMES" CALLED
RACIST RANTS TO SCARE PEOPLE
OF THE EMPOWERED
ARAB-ISRAELI CITIZENS WHO
WERE VOTING.
CLEARLY ON THE PALESTINIAN
ISSUE, HE WENT AGAIN WITH AN
IDENTITY QUESTION ON
JERUSALEM.
SO I THINK IT WAS REALLY
MOBILIZING THE RIGHT.
HE DID THAT.
HE DID SUCCESSFULLY, BUT AT
VERY HIGH COST BECAUSE IT'S
GOING TO COST HIM IN
GOVERNING AND IN FOREIGN
POLICY.
>> Ifill: AMBASSADOR
RABINOVICH S THAT TRUE, IS
THAT WHO THE ISRAELI VOTERS
ARE, SPENDING TIME GETTING
INSIDE NETANYAHU HEAD BUT
ALSO GETTING INSIDE THE
HEADS OF THE VOTERS AND WHAT
THEY ACTUALLY REQUIRE.
>> -- THIS IS DIVIDED
BETWEEN RIGHT AND LEFT,
SECULAR AND ORTHODOX, JEW
AND ARAB, RUSSIAN IMMIGRANTS
AND SO FORTH AND SO FORTH.
AND ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT THINGS THAT AN
ISRAELI POLITICIAN OR PARTY
NEEDS TO DO IN ORDER TO WIN
AN ELECTION IS TO FIND THE
THE COMMON DENOMINATOR IN
ORDER TO-- THE VOTERS.
SO THAT IS ONE ISSUE.
IDENTITY ISSUES IS AN
IMPORTANT-- IS AN IMPORTANT
COMPONENT.
AND THE PERSONA OF THE
CANDIDATE, THE LEFT, CENTER
LEFT WAS ABLE TO WIN EARLIER
ELECTION CAMPAIGNS WHEN HE
PUT A STRONG PERSONALITY
WITH A STRONG SECURITY
CREDENTIALS, BE ITITIES AGO
RABIN OR EHUD BARAK OR THE
ARIEL SHARON AFTER HIS
CONVERSION.
LET US REMEMBER THAT AS
RECENTLY AS 2009, EHUD
OLMERT WON AN ELECTION WITH
A PLATFORM OF CONTINUING
SHARON'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE
GAZA STRIP IN THE WEST BANK.
THAT WAS NOT SO FAR AGO.
SO THE PERSONALITY OF THE
CANDIDATE IS VERY IMPORTANT.
>> Ifill: YES, THANK YOU, I
DIDN'T MEAN TO INTERRUPT.
BUT I DID WANT TO ASK ALL
THREE OF YOU THIS QUESTION,
WHICH IS WHAT DOES THIS MEAN
NOW FOR THE FUTURE, IF THERE
IS A FUTURE OF
PALESTINIAN-ISRAELI PEACE
TALKS.
AND OF THE U.S. RELATIONSHIP
WITH A LEADER WHO NOW WE
HAVE SOME STRAIN WITH, WHAT
DO YOU THINK?
>> THIS IS A VERY BASIC
QUESTION ABOUT WHAT SORT OF
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU
WHAT LIKE TO BE.
HE COULD BE A PRIME MINISTER
OF A NARROW COALITION.
OF A SLIGHTLY WIDER
COALITION.
HE COULD EVEN BE BROADER.
HE CAN DEFINE HIS FUTURE.
IN TERMS OF THE PALESTINIANS,
I THINK WE SHOULD PARS HIS
WORDS CAREFULLY.
WHAT HE SAID WAS AND WHAT
HIS ADVISORS ARE NOW SAYING
IS THERE IS CERTAINLY NO
PALESTINIAN STATE NOW.
CAN CIRCUMSTANCES CHANGE?
CAN THERE BE A RENEWAL OF
DIPLOMACY?
CAN THERE BE SECURITY
COOPERATION THAT REALLY GETS
ENGAGED?
IT'S CERTAINLY POSSIBLE.
>> Ifill: DID YOU SEE THAT?
>> LOOK, HE WOULDN'T BE THE
FIRST POLITICIAN THAT
CHANG HISED MIND AFTER
PROMISING DURING THE
ELECTION IF HE WERE TO
CHANGE COURSE.
BUT THERE IS NOTHING IN HIS
HISTORY THAT WOULD INDICATE
HE IS KANL OF DOING THAT.
HE HAD A CHANCE LAST TIME.
HE DIDN'T HAVE TO GO WITH
THE RIGHT WING COALITION.
HE HAD A CENTER LEFT PARTNER
HE COULD HAVE GONE WITH.
HE COULD HAVE GONE WITH A
WIDER COALITION.
THERE IS NO TRUST AT ALL IN
THIS ADMINISTRATION OR AMONG
PALESTINIANS.
AFTER HIS STATEMENT THAT HE
MADE NOW, NO MATTER WHAT
KIND OF COALITION HE GOES
WITH, HE'S NOT GOING TO
CHANGE HIS MIND QUICKLY.
AND NOBODY IS GOING TO TRUST
TO TEST HIM TO SEE WHETHER
HE POSSIBLY COULD CHANGE HIS
MIND.
I DON'T SEE ANY POSSIBLE
REALISTIC OPENING FOR
RENEWING NEGOTIATIONS ON THE
BASIS OF TWO-STATE SOLUTION
ANY TIME SOON.
>> Ifill: AMBASSADOR, DO YOU
SEE ANY REALISTIC OPENING?
>> POSSIBLY, YES.
I WOULD DO IF I WERE
NETANYAHU'S FRIEND OR
ADVISOR, I WOULD HAVE SAID
TO HIM, DON'T LOOK AT YOUR
PAST, LOOK AT YOUR FUTURE,
YOU ARE 65 YEARS OLD.
IT'S YOUR FOURTH TERM.
MAYBE YOUR LAST TERM.
YOU HAVE SURVIVED IN
POLITICS.
NOW IS-- NOW IS YOUR TIME
AND YOU HAVE THE POWER TO
MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
TAKE BOLD DECISIONS.
YOU WENT TO WASHINGTON TO
GIVE WHAT YOU CALLED
THE-- SPEECH.
BE-- IN THE BOLD DECISIONS
THAT YOU WILL BE MAKING IN
THE NEXT FEW WEEKS AND
MONDAYS.
>> Ifill: I GUESS THAT IS
WHAT WE WILL BE WATCHING,
FOR AMBASSADOR RABINOVICH,
ROB SATLOFF, SHIBLEY TELHAMI,
THANK YOU ALL VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO A LARGE, BUT
OFTEN HIDDEN ISSUE IN AMERICA,
AND WHY SOLVING IT IS GETTING
CAUGHT UP IN CONGRESSIONAL
GRIDLOCK.
MORE THAN 100,000 AMERICAN
CHILDREN AND TEENS ARE CURRENTLY
ESTIMATED TO BE VICTIMS OF SEX
TRAFFICKING.
IN THE PAST MONTH, SENATORS FROM
BOTH PARTIES HAD COME TOGETHER
ON A BILL TO COMBAT THE PROBLEM
AND HELP VICTIMS.
IT WAS TO BE A SHINING EXAMPLE
OF BI-PARTISANSHIP, BUT HAS NOW
HIT A MAJOR POLITICAL WALL.
>> DEMOCRATS OWE THESE VICTIMS,
NOT LOBBYISTS, HELP-- HELP THE
SENATE IS NOW SO CLOSE TO
PASSING.
>> IT'S INSANE TO KEEP GOING
FORWARD ON THESE VOTES THAT
EVERYONE KNOWS ARE GOING TO TURN
OUT THE SAME WAY.
>> Woodruff: PARTY LEADERS DUG
IN THIS MORNING, AS THE SENATE
STANDOFF OVER THE HUMAN
TRAFFICKING BILL ENTERED ITS
SECOND WEEK.
THE MEASURE INITIALLY HAD WIDE
BIPARTISAN BACKING:
IT CREATES A FUND FOR U.S.
VICTIMS OF TRAFFICKING, WHO ARE
OFTEN FORCED INTO PROSTITUTION,
AND IT TOUGHENS FINES AND
PENALTIES FOR SO-CALLED "JOHNS"
WHO BUY SERVICES.
BUT THE DISPUTE IS CENTERED ON A
PROVISION BANNING ANY FUNDS FROM
PAYING FOR A VICTIM'S ABORTION.
DEMOCRATS ACKNOWLEDGED TODAY
THEY ORIGINALLY MISSED THAT
PROVISION-- THAT AN AIDE DID NOT
FLAG IT.
BUT MINORITY WHIP DICK DURBIN
AND OTHERS CHARGE REPUBLICANS
DELIBERATELY MADE THE WORDING
OBSCURE.
>> AND THERE WAS A
REPRESENTATION MADE TO SEVERAL
SENATORS TT THHAIS-- THERE WAS
NOTHING ELSE IN THE BILL TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT OTHER THAN A FEW
LISTED ISSUES, AND THIS WAS NOT
INCLUDED.
>> Woodruff: IN TURN,
REPUBLICANS, LIKE DEB FISCHER OF
NEBRASKA, DENY ILL INTENT, AND
>> TO HAVE THE OTHER SIDE COME
OUT AND SAY THEY DIDN'T READ THE
BILL, THEY WERE CAUGHT OFF-
GUARD, YOU KNOW, COME ON.
THOSE ARE EXCUSES, I BELIEVE,
FOR TRYING TO STOP THE WORK OF
THE UNITED STATES SENATE.
>> Woodruff: FOR NOW, THE
DISPUTE HAS STOPPED ANY WORK ON
CONFIRMING LORETTA LYNCH TO BE
ATTORNEY GENERAL.
MAJORITY LEADER  MITCH McCONNELL
INSISTS THAT WON'T HAPPEN UNTIL
THE TRAFFICKING BILL IS VOTED
ON.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THE
BILL BEFORE CONGRESS AND THE
ISSUE OF HUMAN AND SEX
TRAFFICKING, WE ARE JOINED BY
BRADLEY MYLES, C.E.O. OF
POLARIS, A NON PROFIT THAT WORKS
TO COMBAT SLAVERY AND HUMAN
TRAFFICKING.
AND, HOLLY AUSTIN SMITH, A
FORMER VICTIM HERSELF, WHO NOW
ADVOCATES FOR VICTIMS OF SEX
TRAFFICKING.
SHE IS ALSO THE AUTHOR OF
"WALKING PREY: HOW AMERICA'S
YOUTH ARE VULNERABLE TO SEX
SLAVERY."
AND WELCOME YOU BOTH.
HOLLY AUSTIN SMITH, LET ME
START WITH YOU.
YOU WERE A VICTIM AT THE AGE
OF 14.
TELL US BRIEFLY WHAT
HAPPENED TO YOU?
>> SURE, I WAS A YOUNG TEEN
VICTIM.
I WAS 14.
I WAS CONFUSED, ANGRY,
DEPRESSED, LIKE MANY YOUNG
TEENAGERS, I WAS STRUGGLING
WITH THE TRANSITION BETWEEN
MIDDLE SCHOOL AND HIGH
SCHOOL.
AND I MET A MAN AT MY LOCAL
SHOPPING MALL WHO TURNED OUT
TO BE A PIMP.
HE CONVINCED ME TO RUN AWAY
FROM HOME WITH IDEAS OF
BEING A MODEL OR A MUSIC
ARTIST, BUT WITHIN HOURS OF
RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME, I
LEARNED THE TRUTH.
THAT HE WAS A PIMP AND HE
FORCED ME INTO PROSTITUTION
IN ATLANTIC CITY, NEW
JERSEY.
>> Woodruff: BRADLEY MYLES,
HER STORY IS JUST SO TOUGH
TO HEAR.
AND I THINK MANY AMERICANS
HEAR ABOUT THIS.
THIS DOESN'T REALLY HAPPEN
IN THIS COUNTRY.
IT'S KIND OF AN INVISIBLE
CRIME.
HOW WIDE SPREAD IS IT?
>> OY THINK THAT MOST PEOPLE
REALLY DO BELIEVE THIS IS
HAPPENING OVERSEAS BUT THERE
IS A DISBELIEF THAT IT'S
HAPPENING HERE.
AND FOR US, WE KNOW THAT
THIS IS HAPPENING TO
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE, LIKE YOU MENTIONED,
100,000 U.S. CITIZEN YOUTH.
WE OPERATE THE NATIONAL
HOTLINE FOR THE COUNTRY
CALLED THE NATIONAL HUMAN
TRAFFICKING RESOURCE CENTER.
WE'RE ON THE HOTLINE EVERY
DAY.
LAST YEAR WE LEARNED ABOUT
OVER 5,000 CASES OF
TRAFFICKING.
AND TWO-THIRDS OF THOSE WERE
CASES OF SEX TRAFFICKING.
SO IT'S TRUCK STOPS, IT'S IN
HOTELS, IT'S IN ELICIT
MASSAGE PARLORS, IT'S IN
RESIDENTIAL BROTHELS, IT'S
IN STREET PROSTITUTION.
IT'S ALL THESE PLACES.
AND PEOPLE I THINK SEE IT AS
PROSTITUTION BUT THEY DON'T
REALIZE THAT IT MIGHT BE
CHILDREN INVOLVED.
THEY DON'T REALIZE IT MIGHT
BE PEOPLE INVOLVED WHO
ARE THERE BY FORCE, VIOLENCE
OR COERCION AND THEY DON'T
SEE THE DEEPER CONTROL THAT
uff: AN HOLLY SMITH,
WHO ARE THE VICTIMS?
THEY COME FROM ALL WALKS OF
LIFE, ALL PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY?
>> A VICTIM CAN BE ANY AGE,
ANY GENDER, ANY CLASS.
TRAFFICKERS HAVE THE ABILITY
TO REACH OUT TO VICTIMS IN
ANY COMMUNITY, ESPECIALLY
WITH SOCIAL MEDIA TODAY.
BUT CERTAINLY THOSE WHO ARE
MOST AT RISK ARE THOSE KIDS
WHO ARE LACKING IN RESOURCES.
OR ADULTS WHO ARE LACKING IN
RESOURCES.
>> Woodruff: AND BRADLEY
MYLES, TELL US, WE DID TALK
ABOUT IT IN THE SETTUP THAT
PEOPLE JUST HEARD, BUT WHAT
IN ESSENCE WOULD THIS BILL
OR THESE BILLS DO FOR THESEMS?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE PRIMARY
FOCUSES IS PROVIDING MORE
SERVICES FOR SURVIVORS.
THERE'S THIS TRAFFIC VICTIM
FUND THAT WAS GOING TO BE
PUT TOGETHER WITH PROCEEDS
FROM DIFFERENT CRIMINAL
PROSECUTIONS THAT WOULD GO
TO SURVIVOR SERVICES.
THERE'S WAY THAT SURVIVORS
COULD GET MORE RESTITUTION
AND COMPENSATION.
THERE'S MORE OFFICIAL
RECOGNITION FOR SURVIVORS.
THERE'S EVEN A POTENTIAL OF
THE REAUTHORIZATION OF THE
FULL APPARATUS OF RUNNAWAY
AND HOME LTSES YOUTH
PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED
STATES TO PREVENT
TRAFFICKING BECAUSE HOMELESS
YOUTH ARE SOME THE MOST
VULNERABLE YOUTH PIMPS ARE
TARGETING.
SO THERE ARE ALL THESE TO
LOOK AT SURVIVOR SUPPORT
THERE ARE ALSO PROVISIONS TO
CRACK DOWN ON TRAFFICKERS
MORE AND THE BUYERS OF SEX.
AND WE FELL LIKE THERE IS A
STRONG PACKAGE OF BILLS THAT
WERE REALLY TEED UP THERE.
>> Woodruff: HOLLY SMITH
FROM YOUR
PERFECT-- PERSPECTIVE, WHY
IS IT IMPORTANT TO PASS
THIS?
>> I THINK THAT TO PASS
LEGISLATION THAT'S GOING TO
SUPPORT VICTIMS, PASS
BOLSTER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS,
PASS LEGISLATION THAT'S
GOING TO BRING TRAINING TO
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND
EDUCATION TO OUR SCHOOLS IN
ORDER TO EDUCATION YOUTH
ABOUT TACTICS OF SEX
TRAFFICKERS.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
BRING PREVENTION INTO OUR
COMMUNITIES.
IRDON'T KNOW IF THERE'S
ENOUGH FOCUS ON PREVENTION
IN THIS BILL.
BUT PART OF WHAT WOULD BE
FOCUSED ON PREVENTION IS THE
RUNNAWAY AND HOMELESS YOUTH
REAUTHORIZATION ACT.
>> I WANT TO ASK YOU BOTH
ABOUT THE LANGUAGE THAT'S
BEEN HOLDING THIS UP, THE
ABORTION LANGUAGE IN THE
BILL.
AND BRADLEY MYLES TO YOU
FIRST, WE KNOW IT SAYS IN SO
MANY WORDS THAT GOVERNMENT
MONEY COULD NOT BE USED TO
PAY FOR AN ABORTION FOR
VICTIMS UNLESS THEY WERE THE
VICTIM OF A RAPE IN A
COERCED CIRCUMSTANCES.
WITHOUT WEIGHING IN ON THE
MERITS OF ABORTION OR NOT,
WHAT DIFFERENCE COULD THAT
MAKE, DO YOU BELIEVE, FOR
THE YOUNG PEOPLE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT, THE YOUNG
WOMEN WHO SAY WE'RE
PREGNANT?
>> SO FOR US, WE'RE A DIRECT
SERVICE PROVIDER FOR VICTIMS
OF TRAFFICKING.
AND WE KNOW WHEN SOMEONE
COMES OUT OF ONE OF THESE
SITUATIONS, THEY DESCRIBE
BEING IN A SITUATION OF
TOTAL CONTROL.
THEY HAVE BEEN RAPED.
THEY'VE BEEN SEXUALLY
ASSAULTED.
THEY'VE HAD SO MUCH OF THEIR
LIFE CONTROLLED.
AND SO WHEN WE'RE PROVIDING
SERVICES, WE WANT TO CREATE
A SPECTRUM THAT IS AS WIDE
AS POSSIBLE AND AS EMPOWERING
AS POSSIBLE AND LET THEM
CHART THE COURSE OF THEIR
OWN SERVICES AND NOT PUT
LIMITS ON WHAT IS POSSIBLE.
AND SO SOMETIMES THERE'S A
DEBATE ABOUT WOULD THIS
COVER THIS OR WOULD THIS
COVER THAT.
AND COULD YOU ALWAYS DEFINE
IT AS RAPE OR NOT.
AND WE DIDN'T EVEN WANT TO
GET INTO THAT DEBATE.
WE DIDN'T WANT THAT TO ENTER
THIS DIALOGUE BECAUSE WE
KNEW THAT THE ENTIRE SENATE,
THERE'S SO MUCH PASSION
AROUND THIS BILL FROM THE
REPUBLICANS AND THE
DEMOCRATS.
BOTH SIDES ARE INCREDIBLY
PASSIONED ABOUT FIGHTING
TRAFFICKING, WE JUST DIDN'T
WANT TO HAVE TO GO THERE TO
BEGIN TO ASKING THOSE
QUESTIONS.
>> Woodruff: AND FINALLY,
HOLLY SMITH, FROM WHAT YOU
KNOW, AND YOU STUDIED THIS,
OBVIOUSLY FOR A LONG TIME
AND FROM YOUR OWN PERSONAL
EXPERIENCE.
WOULD THIS-- WOULD COVERING
ABORTION FOR THE YOUNG
PEOPLE, YOUNG WOMEN WHO ARE
VICTIMS OF THIS, WHO MAY
HAVE GOTTEN PREGNANT, WOULD
THIS COVER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES
WITH THESE YOUNG WOMEN
BECAME PREGNANT?
>> ARE YOU ASKING IF THE
BILL WOULD COVER ALL
CIRCUMSTANCES?
>> THE LANGUAGE IN THE BILL.
>> I AM NOT SURE ABOUT THE
LANGUAGE IN THE BILL.
BUT I THINK THAT IT NEEDS TO
NOT BE A PART OF THE
CONVERSATION.
VICTIMS NEED TO HAVE TOTAL
CONTROL OVER WHAT OPTIONS
ARE AVAILABLE TO THEM.
BECAUSE THEY'RE BEING TAKEN
OUT OF A SITUATION WHERE
THEY HAD NO CONTROL.
WHERE THEY HAD NO ABILITY TO
DECIDE WHAT WAS AVAILABLE TO
THEM AND WHAT WASN'T
AVAILABLE TO THEM.
THEY WEREN'T ABLE TO CHOOSE
WHAT THEY DID AND WHAT THEY
DIDN'T DO.
FOR ANYONE WHO IS REALLY
INTERESTED IN WHETHER OR NOT
THESE SERVIC VALUABLE TO VICTIM,
I ENCOURAGE YOU TO REACH OUT
TO SERVICE PROVIDERS WHO ARE
WORKING WITH VICTIMS ON A
REGULAR BASIS.
AND I WOULD ESPECIALLY
ENCOURAGE YOU TO REACH OUT
TO SURVIVOR-LED SERVICE
PROVIDERS.
>> Woodruff: HOLLY AUSTIN
SMITH AND BRADLEY MYLES,
VERY TOUGH SUBJECT, THANK
YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: MORE THAN 1.5 MILLION
WOMEN IN THE U.S. GET A BREAST
BIOPSY EACH YEAR.
BUT A NEW STUDY RAISES DOUBTS
ABOUT THEIR ACCURACY.
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLORES THE
FINDINGS, AND THE IMPLICATIONS
FOR TREATMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE STUDY FOUND
THAT WHEN IT COMES TO INVASIVE
CANCERS, PATHOLOGISTS' DIAGNOSIS
WERE GENERALLY CORRECT.
BUT AN EXPERT PANEL SAID
PATHOLOGISTS HAD MORE TROUBLE
MAKING THE RIGHT DIAGNOSIS IN
ABOUT 25% OF ALL CASES.
THAT WAS PRIMARILY TRUE WHEN IT
INVOLVED A CASE OF DUCTAL
CARCINOMA IN SITU, OR D.C.I.S.--
CELLS THAT ARE ABNORMAL, BUT NOT
INVASIVE.
DOCTORS ALSO HAD TROUBLE
DIAGNOSING IN CASES OF ATYPIA--
WHEN ABNORMAL NON-CANCEROUS
CELLS ARE IDENTIFIED.
DOCTOR JOANN ELMORE OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON SCHOOL
OF MEDICINE IS THE STUDY'S LEAD
AUTHOR.
SO DR. ELMORE, HOW BIG OF A
POP LATIONS ARE WE TALKING
ABOUT WHEN THERE ARE ERROR
RATES OF OPINIONLY 20 OR
25%?
>> WELL, I THINK YOU STARTED
CORRECTLY BY SAYING THAT
EVERY YEAR 1.6 MILLION
MILLION BIOPSIES ARE DONE IN
THE U.S.
OF THOSE BIOPSIES, SOME ARE
INTERPRETED AS NORMAL,
OTHERS AS CANCER.
AND IT'S THESE IN BETWEEN
DIAGNOSES THAT ARE THE MOST
PROBLEMATIC.
IT IS VERY HARD FOR US TO
GIVE A DIAGNOSIS.
THERE ARE PROBABLY 200,000
WOMEN EACH YEAR THAT HAVE A
BREAST BIOPSY AND GET A
REPORT THAT SAYS THEY'RE
ABNORMALLAL CELLS.
IT'S NOT NORMAL AND IT'S NOT
INVASIVE CANCER, IT'S
SOMEWHERE IN BETWEEN.
>> Srennivasan: WHEN YOU GET
A SENTENCE LIKE THAT OUT OF
YOUR DOCTOR'S MOUTH, I'M
SURE THAT'S ONE OF THE LAST
THINGS YOU WANT TO HEAR.
BUT WHAT IS THE CONSEQUENCE
OF THAT?
DOES THAT MEAN THAT PEOPLE
ARE TREATED TOO AGGRESSIVELY
OR NOT TREATED AGGRESSIVELY
ENOUGH?
>> WELL, LET'S START WITH
YOUR FIRST COMMENTS WHICH IS
VERY CORRECT.
WHEN YOU HEAR THAT SENTENCE,
ESPECIALLY A WORD LIKE
DUCTAL CARCINOMA INSITU, IT
CAN BE VERY SCARY FOR WOMEN
AND THEIR FAMILY.
AND EVEN THOUGH IT HAS THE
WORD CARCINOMA THE
SAME THING AS INVASIVE
CANCER.
SO I GUESS FIRST I WOULD
RECOMMEND THAT WOMEN STOP,
TACK A DEEP BREATH AND
REALIZE THAT THIS IS NOT A
DIAGNOSIS OF INVASIVE BREAST
CANCER AND THEY HAVE TIME TO
PAUSE AND REFLECT AND GATHER
INFORMATION.
>> WE FOUND THAT WITH THE
DIAGNOSIS OF DCIS, WHILE
FOUR OUT OF FIVE AGREED ON A
DIAGNOSIS, THIS ALSO MEANT
ONE OUT OF FIVE DISAGREED.
FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF ATYPIA,
WE FOUND THAT ABOUT 50%
AGREEMENT.
SO THIS IS SIMILAR TO THE
AGREEMENT OF FLIPPING A COIN,
GUESSING HEADS OR TAILS.
WHEN WOMEN ARE DIAGNOSED
WITH DCIS, THEY ARE TOLD
THAT THEY'RE AT INCREASED
RISK OF BREAST CANCER.
WE CAN'T IDENTIFY WHIC
WOMAN IS GOING TO GO ON TO
BE DIAGNOSED WITH BREAST
CANCER.
AND SO UNDERSTANDABLY, A LOT
OF WOMEN WANT TO HAVE WHAT
SOME WOULD CONSIDER PRETTY
AGGRESSIVE TREATMENT.
WOMEN ARE HAVING
MASTECTOMIES AND LUMPECTOMY
WITH RADIATION THERAPY.
WOMEN ARE DCIS ARE HAVING
ABOUT THE SAME KIND OF
TREATMENTS AS WOMEN WITH
EARLY STAGE INVASIVE CANCER.
>> THE IDEA THAT THIS IS
PATHOLOGIST INTERPRETING
WHAT THE SLIDE SHOWS THEM,
IN THIS DAY AND AGE, I
ALMOST IMAGINE THAT A
COMPUTER PROGRAMMER,
ALGORITHM OF SOME SORT COULD
AT LEAST GIVE US A LEAD.
BUT THIS SEEMS ALMOST LIKE
AN INTERPRETATION.
IT IS UP TO HUMANS TO
INTERPRET WHETHER OR NOT
THIS CANCER OR THAT THESE
CELLS ARE EXHIBITING A
CANCER.
>> IN THIS DAY AND AGE, I
THINK MANY ARE SURPRISED
THAT MUCH OF MEDICINE IS AN
ART.
WHAT WE HAVE FOUND WITH
BREAST BIOPSY INTERPRETATION,
IT'S ALSO A SIMILAR FINDING
WITH RADIOLOGIST
INTERRUPTING MAMMOGRAMS W
CARDIOLOGISTS LISTENING TO
HEART MURMURS USING THEIR
SETH SCOPE.
AND SO THIS VARIABILITY
-- VARIABILITY AMONG
PHYSICIANS WHEN WE GIVE A
DIAGNOSIS HAS BEEN VOTED IN
ALL SPECIALTIES.
SO IT'S NOT UNIQUE TO
PATHOLOGY.
FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS WE
HAVE BEEN DIAGNOSING CANCER
BY GETTING THE TISSUE,
PUTTING IT ON A CLASS SLIDE,
LOOKING AT THAT TIME UNDER A
MICROSCOPE.
AND DECIDING, USING OUR
VISION WHETHER IT IS NORMAL
VERSUS CANCER.
YOU WOULD OPEN IN THIS DAY
AND AGE WITH MODERN
TECHNOLOGY, WE WOULD HAVE
OTHER COOLS, OTHERWISE
MOLECULAR MARKERS OR GENETIC
TESTS, BUT CURRENTLY OUR
DIAGNOSIS IS PROVIDED BY THE
PATHOLOGIST.
>> DID YOU ASK ABOUT
COMPUTERS, THOUGH, AND THAT
IS AN INTERESTING QUESTION.
WE NOW CAN TAKE THESE SLIDES
AND DIGITIZE THEM AND PUT
THE IMAGE UP ON A SCREEN.
AND SO PATHOLOGISTS NOW CAN
ACTUALLY LOOK AT THE IMAGES
ON A COMPUTER SCREEN.
IT'S NOT FDA APPROVED.
BUT WE CAN START HAVING
COMPUTERS EVALUATE THESE
IMAGES TO SEE WHETHER WE CAN
COME UP WITH COMPUTER-AIDED
DETECTION PROGRAMS.
THEY'VE DEVELOPED THIS IN
MANY OTHER AREAS OF CLINICAL
MEDICINE.
SO IT'S SOMETHING WE NEED TO
LOOK INTO.
>> DR. JOANNE ELMORE FROM
THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: IT MIGHT SURPRISE
YOU TO HEAR THAT ONE OF THE HOT
DESTINATION CITIES, ESPECIALLY
FOR YOUNG, SO CALLED,
MILLENNIALS, IS THE TWIN CITIES
OF MINNEAPOLIS AND SAINT PAUL.
I TRAVELLED THERE RECENTLY, AS
PART OF OUR PARTNERSHIP WITH
"THE ATLANTIC," TO EXPLORE THE
FINDINGS IN A RECENT ARTICLE IN
THE MAGAZINE, AND TO TRY TO FIND
OUT WHETHER THE SO-CALLED
MINNEAPOLIS MIRACLE IS REALLY
PAYING OFF FOR EVERYONE.
IN MANY WAYS MILL BE-- MILL
ENIAN-- MILLENNIALS MAY BE
THE BIGGEST VICTIMS OF THE
GREAT RECESSION.
WRITER DEREK THOMPSON HAS
LIVED THIS REALITY IN NEW
YORK CITY, ONE OF THE MOST
EXPENSIVE ON EARTH.
>> A BLUEBERRY --
>> I WANTED TO FIGURE OUT
WHY THE AMERICAN DREAM
SEEMED TO BE SPLINTERING
BETWEEN CITIES THAT WERE
UPWARDLY MOBILE AND CITIES
THAT WERE AFFORDABLE.
>> FOR ANSWERS THOMPSON
TURNED TO THE LATEST
NATIONAL DATA ON CITIES WITH
THE GREATEST OPPORTUNITY TO
MOVE UP INTO THE MIDDLE
CLASS AND BEYOND.
VERSUS THE COST-OF-LIVING.
>> THE CITIES THAT WERE THE
BEST FOR UPWARD MOBILITY
WERE THE WRSES FOR
AFFORDABILITY AND THE CITIES
THAT WERE THE MOST A
AFFORDABLE HAD BAD UPWARD
MOBILITY.
ONE EXCEPTION TO THE RULE.
>> MINNEAPOLIS ST. PAUL WAS
CLEARLY AT THE TOP.
IT WAS THE RICHEST CITY THAT
WAS EXCEPTIONAL.
>> THE GREATER MINNEAPOLIS
ST. PAUL METRO AREA IS MADE
UP OF AT LEAST 13 COUNTYS
AND APPROXIMATELY THREEND A
A HALF MILLION PEOPLE.
THE LATEST U.S. CENSUS RANKS
IT AS HAVING THE FIFTH
HIGHEST MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD
INCOME IN THE COUNTRY.
>> AMONG WORKERS BETWEEN 18
AND 34, IT'S TOP TEN WHEN IT
COMES TO MEDIAN INCOME, IT'S
TOP TEN WHEN IT COMES TO
LOWEST POVERTY RATE, WHEN IT
COMES TO HIGHEST SHARE OF
COLLEGE GRADUATES.
>> GOOD STATISTICS FOR A
CITY THAT OFTEN GOES
UNNOTICED ON BOTH COASTS.
>> I HAVE TALKED TO MY
PROFESSIONAL FRIENDS AROUND
THE WORLD, AND THEY ASK ME
WHAT ARE YOU DOING IN
MINNEAPOLIS.
>> MILES SHARE IS A BUSINESS
PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MINNESOTA'S CARLSON
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT.
>> AND I SAY THERE ARE 17
FORTUNE 500 HEADQUARTERS IN
TOWN.
AND THEY GO, YOU CAN'T BE
RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: THE AREA IS
HOME TO MANY WORLD-CLASS
BRANDS INCLUDING CARGILL,
GENERAL MILLS AND TARGET.
>> WE HAVE HAD THIS TALENTED
WORKFORCE THAT TENDS TO STAY
HERE AND MOVE AMONGST
COMPANIES RATHER THAN PICK
UP AND MOVE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: MANY BELIEVE
THE SUCCESS THE TWIN CITIES
HAVE SEEN IS MORE THAN JUST
AN ACCIDENT OF LOCATION,
COMMERCE AND QUALITY OF LIFE.
>> THERE'S ALWAYS BEEN KIND
OF A COLLECTIVE SENSE OF
COMMUNITY IN THE STATE OF
MINNESOTA AND THE TWIN
CITIES.
>> Woodruff: ST. PAUL MAYOR
CHRIS COLEMAN KNOWS THE
AREA'S POLIT CALL HISTORY
WELL.
HIS FATHER NICK COLEMAN WAS
THE STATE SENATE MAJORITY
LEADER FROM 1973 TO 1981.
>> IN THE '70s IT WAS AN
INCREDIBLE SPIRIT OF WHAT
CAN WE DO DIFFERENTLY TO
MAKE SURE THAT EVERYONE IS
BENEFITTING.
AND THAT THE WHOLE STATE IS
ELEVATED AS A RESULT OF OUR
POLICIES.
>> Woodruff: POLITICIANS ON
BOTH SIDES.
AISLE PASSED PROGRESSIVE
EDUCATION, TAX SHARING AND
HOUSING LAWS.
>> IT WAS CALLED THE
MINNESOTA MIRACLE AT THE
TIME.
IT WAS VERY UNIQUE AND IT
HAD TREMENDOUS BENEFITS TO
THE QUALITY OF LIFE AS A
CITY.
>> Woodruff: FORMER STATE
LEGISLATOR AND LAW PROFESSOR
MY RON ORFIELD RUNS THE
INSTITUTE ON METROPOLITAN
OPPORTUNITY AT
THE-- OPPORTUNITY AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA.
>> WHEN WE DECIDED IN 1971
THAT EVERY COMMUNITY WOULD
SHARE 40% OF THE GROWTH OF
THE BUSINESS TAX BASE.
>> Woodruff: MINNEAPOLIS
ST. PAUL WAS ONE OF A VERY
FEW METRO AREAS IN THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY TO ENACT A
FISCAL DISPARITIES LAW.
>> THEY TAKE HALF THE GROWTH
OF BUSINESS INCOME TAXES IN
THE METRO AREA AND THEY
SPREAD IT ACROSS THE REGION.
WHAT THIS DOES IS IT ALLOWS
THE LESS RICH COMMUNITIES IN
THE MINNEAPOLIS ST. PAUL
AREA TO SHARE IN THE
COMMERCIAL WEALTH OF THE
ENTIRE CITY.
>> HOW MUCH DOES THE CITY OF
ST. PAUL RIGHT NOW DEPEND ON
THAT FORMULA TO STAY
FISCALLY STRONG?
>> IT IS A ABSOLUTELY
CRITICAL PIECE OF THE
FUNDING FOR THE CITY OF
ST. PAUL.
TWO-THIRDS OF OUR REVENUES
GO TO POLICE OFFICERS,
FIREFIGHTERS OVER SAFETY, IF
WE LOST THAT REVENUE SHARING
IT WOULD BE DIFFICULT TO
MAINTAIN THOSE LEVELS OF
PUBLIC SAFETY.
>> Woodruff: IN ADDITION, IN
THE 19 70s, THE MINNESOTA
LEGISLATURE WAS ALSO ONE OF
THE FEW IN THE COUNTRY TO
FOCUS ON INTEGRATION IN
PUBLIC HOUSING.
>> FOR 15 YEARS WE HAVE 70%
OF OUR LOW-INCOME HOUSING IN
THE WHITEST PART OF SU BURBA,
IN THE WHITEST
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> THEY DID A GOOD JOB TO
MAKING SURE GHETTOS WEREN'T
CON GUILING BECAUSE
CONCENTRATING ALL OF THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN A
COUPLE AREAS,.
>> WHILE THERE IS A SHARED
PROSPERITY FOR TWIN CITIES
IN EVERY RACIAL GROUP
PROBABLY UP UNTIL THE MID
'80s.
>> Woodruff: BUT DECADES AGO,
THE REGION WAS LESS THAN
FIVE PERCENT MINORITY.
TODAY, IT HAS GROWN TO 20%.
IN ADDITION TO
AFRICAN-AMERICANS AND
HISPANICS, THE AREA IS NOW
HOME TO THE LARGEST SOMALI
AND MONG POPULATION OUTSIDE
OF SOMALIA AND VIETNAM.
>> STARTING IN THE LATE
1980S WE ALLOWED OUR CIVIL
RIGHTS LAWS TO LAPS LIKE
MUCH OF THE COUNTRY DID.
>> Woodruff: AFTER A DECADE
OF A FAIR SHARE HOUSING
POLICY, IN 1986, DEMOCRATS
WHO CONTROLLED THE STATE
HOUSE AND GOVERNORSHIP
STEPPED BACK FROM IT.
>> OUR PATTERNS OF
SEGREGATION ARE STILL HALF
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE,
THEY'RE STILL BETTER BUT
WE'RE NOT WHAT WE ONCE WERE.
Woo>>druff: WHAT IS IT LIKE
TO LIVE IN THE MINNEAPOLIS,
ST. PAUL AREA.
>> DEPENDS ON WHO YOU ARE.
WHAT YOUR RACE S WHAT YOUR
ECONOMIC LEVEL IS, WHAT YOUR
EDUCATIONAL LEVEL IS.
>> Woodruff: SANDRA SAMUELS
IS PRESIDENT & CEO OF THE
NORTH SIDE ACHIEVEMENT ZONE,
AN EDUCATIONAL NONPROFIT
FOCUSED ON ENDING
MULTIGENERATIONAL POV ERT IN
NORTH MINNEAPOLIS.
>> IT'S A TALE OF TWO CITIES,
IT REALLY IS WE HAVE THE
HIGHEST RACIAL UNEMPLOYMENT
GAP IN THE ENTIRE COUNTRY
BETWEEN PEOPLE OF COLOR AND
WHITE PEOPLE IN THIS STATE.
>> Woodruff: WHILE
MINNEAPOLIS, ST. PAUL MAY BE
A TOP PICK FOR MILLENNIALING,
THE DIFFERENCE IN
OPPORTUNITIES BETWEEN BLACKS
AND WHITES IS ONE OF THE
WIDEST IN THE COUNTRY.
>> WE HAVE A 47% FOUR-YEAR
HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION RATE
FOR AFRICAN-AMERICAN
STUDENTS.
AND STATEWIDE IT'S LIKE 86%
FOR WHITE STUDENTS.
HOME OWNERSHIP, 76% FOR
WHITE FAMILIES, AND 34% FOR
AFRICAN-AMERICANS.
>> SO MY QUESTION IS, IS THE
AMERICAN DREAM REALLY
ATTAINABLE HERE?
>> IN MINNEAPOLIS, AND THE
VERY POOR POCKETS OF
SEGREGATION THAT ARE GROWING,
THE AMERICAN DREAM IS
FALLING FURTHER AWAY THAN IT
HAS EVER BEEN BEFORE.
>> Woodruff: BY 2040, THE
MINORITY POPULATION IS
EXPECTED TO GROW TO AT LEAST
40%.
AND LOCAL LEADERS SAY THE
RACIAL DISPARITY IN
EDUCATION, OPPORTUNITY AND
INCOME MUST BE ADDRESSED IF
FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES ARE TO
CONTINUE TO COME AND THRIVE.
>> THEY'RE NOT HERE FOR OUR
BEACH FRONT PROPERTY.
THEY ARE HERE BECAUSE WE
HAVE HISTORICALLY HAD THE
MOST EDUCATED WORKFORCE.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHO OUR
WORKFORCE WILL BE BY 2040,
THEY ARE NOT BEING EDUCATED
IN AN EQUITABLE WAY.
AND SO WE WON'T HAVE A
WORKFORCE THAT OUR REGION
NEEDS.
>> Woodruff: IN A POPULAR
EATERY NOT FAR FROM CITY
HALL, WE ASKED A GROUP OF
MILLENNIAL NURSING STUDENTS
THEIR OPINION OF THE TWIN
CITY METRO AREA.
>> EVEN THOUGH IT IS
MAJORITY WHITE, THERE IS
SOMETHING THAT YOU CAN FIND
WHETHER YOU ARE BLACK, WHITE,
THE CULTURES, DIFFERENT
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, EVERYONE
IS WELCOME.
>> I'M AN IMMIGRANT FROM
WEST AFRICA.
TWO YEARS AGO I WAS ABLE TO
AFFORD MY OWN HOME.
MINNESOTA WAS ABLE TO
INCORPORATE MY EDUCATION
FROM AFRICA HERE SO THAT I
COULD PURSUE MY DREAM.
>> I LOVE MINNEAPOLIS.
THAT'S WHY I CA BE CANDID
AROUND THE PLACES WHERE WE
HAVE GOT TO COME TOGETHER
AND CHANGE THIS THING FOR
PEOPLE.
>> WE ARE FAR FROM PERFECT.
WE HAVE SOME HUGE CHALLENGES
IN THIS COMMUNITY.
BUT WE HAVE A BASE UPON
WHICH TO BUILD.
AND I THINK IT WILL ALLOW US
TO DEAL WITH ISSUES OF
RACIAL DISPARITIES, FOR
INSTANCE.
>> Woodruff: IN FACT, MANY
METRO AREAS IN THE U.S. ARE
DEALING WITH THE SAME
CHALLENGES THE TWIN CITIES
ARE.
GROWING RACIAL INEQUITIES,
EVEN AS ECONOMIES FLOURISH.
DEREK THOMPSON BELIEVED THAT
IF SOLUTIONS ARE TO BE FOUND,
THEY WON'T COME FROM
WASHINGTON.
>> THE FUTURE OF PUBLIC
POLICY IS GOING TO COME OUT
OF THE STATE AND THE LOCAL
LEVEL.
AND GIVEN THE FACT THAT
MINNEAPOLIS ST. PAUL HAS AN
EXCEPTIONAL RECORD NOT ONLY
ON BUILDING INCOME, BUILDING
WEALTH, BUT ALSO SHARING
WEALTH AND CREATING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR UPWARD
MOBILITY, WE SHOULD PAY MORE
ATTENTION TO CITIES LIKE IT
IF WE WANT TO REPLICATE THAT
FORMULA ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: 100 YEARS AGO THIS
MAY, THERE WAS A FATEFUL
ENCOUNTER IN THE IRISH SEA.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT STORY
FROM OUR LATEST ADDITION TO THE
NEWSHOUR BOOKSHELF.
>> Brown: IT WAS ONE OF THE
WORST MARITIME DISASTERS IN
HISTORY.
THE SINKING OF THE BRITISH
PASSENGER SHIP, "LUSITANIA"
BY A GERMAN SUBMARINE,
ON MAY 7, 1915.
NEARLY 1,200 PEOPLE, INCLUDING
123 AMERICANS, WERE KILLED.
IT'S A STORY OF LEGENDARY
PROPORTIONS, BUT ALSO ONE WITH A
NUMBER OF MYSTERIES AT ITS CORE.
AND IT'S TOLD IN THE NEW BOOK,
"DEAD WAKE."
AUTHOR ERIK LARSON, WHOSE
PREVIOUS BEST-SELLERS INCLUDE
"THE DEVIL IN THE WHITE CITY"
JOINS ME NOW.
UNLIKE SOME OF THESE OTHER
OF YOUR PASES WORKS, THIS
ONE MORE WELL-KNOWN, MORE
WELL-- WHY DID YOU WANT TO
COME INTO IT?
>> AT FIRST I WAS A LITTLE
PUT OFF BY THE FACT THAT IT
WAS SO WELL-KNOWN AND SO
WELL TROD.
BUT WHAT I REALIZED AS I
STARTED DOING SOME
EXPLORATORY RESEARCH WAS
THAT THERE WAS AN
OPPORTUNITY HERE I FELT TO
BRING SOMETHING TO THE PARTY
THAT HADN'T NECESSARILY BEEN
BROUGHT BEFORE.
I SAW IT AS, CUZ THERE IS SO
MUCH FANTASTIC ARCHIVEALITY
MATERIAL THAT IT SEEMED TO
OFFER AN OPPORTUNITY FOR ME
TO PUT ON MY-- ALFRED
HITCHCOCK HAT AND REALLY
MAKE IT KIND OF AN EXERCISE
IN NONFICTION SUSPENSE.
>> SUSPENSE AND MYSTERY SO
THAT KIND OF DETAIL, AND
THAT'S WHAT YOU REALLY GO
THROUGH HERE.
THE DETAIL, YOU ARE TALKING
ABOUT INDIVIDUAL LIVES,
DIARIES.
>> INTERCEPTED TELEGRAMS,
LOVE LETTERS FROM PRESIDENT
WILSON TO HIS GIRLFRIEND.
I MEAN THERE IS SO MUCH
MATERIAL.
IT WAS A SURPLUS OF RICHES.
>> Brown: THIS IS THE KIND
OF STUFF THAT TURNS YOU ON.
>> YES, YES.
I MEAN ANYTHING
THAT-- ANYTHING THAT ALLOWS
A STORY TO ADVANCE AT A FAST
CLIP.
AND THERE IS SO MUCH GREAT
STUFF.
>> Brown: THE SHIP, A WONDER
OF ITS TIME, RIGHT, A
MARVEL.
>> YES.
>> Brown: ALSO ITS NEMESIS,
THE SUBMARINE, A MARVEL IN
ANOTHER WAY OF ITS TIME.
>> RIGHT.
>> Brown: SO PARTLY WHAT
GRABBED ME, IT IS A STORY OF
TECHNOLOGY, IN A WAY.
>> IN PART, IT IS.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE HAVE
TO-- I HAD TO REALLY
DISCIPLINE MYSELF TO DO IS
TO GO BACK, NOT GO BACK IN
TIME, OBVIOUSLY, BUT TO
ADOPT THE POINT-OF-VIEW OF
THE ERA TO APPRECIATE HOW
NEW THE SUBMARINE WAS AS A
WEAPON.
TODAY IT IS VERY FAMILIAR TO
US, ALL THE SILENT RUN DEEP
AND ALL THE SONAR PINGING
AND SO FORTH.
BUT AT THIS TIME, BY THE WAY,
THERE WAS NO SONAR INVOLVING
SUBMARINES IN WORLD WAR I.
>> Brown: IT WAS OUT THERE
BLINDLY.
>> IT WAS OUT THERE BLINDLY
STUMBLING AROUND, RELYING ON
CHARTS.
BUT THE THING THAT I REALLY
HAD TO DISCIPLINE MYSELF TO
APPRECIATE AT ALL TIMES WAS
HOW NEW THE SUBMARINE WAS AS
A WEAPON OF WAR.
AND HOW POORLY UNDERSTOOD IT
WAS NOT JUST BY CIVILIANSS,
BUT BY THE PEOPLE WHO
COMMANDED THE SUBMARINES, BY
THE BRITISH NAVY, BY THE
GERMAN NAVY, NOBODY REALLY
UNDERSTOOD WHAT A SUBMARINE
WAS CAPABLE OF.
>> Brown: SO THE OTHER SIDE
IS THE PEOPLE, RIGHT.
SO THERE IS THE LARGE, THE
WOODROW WILSON, WINSTON
CHURCHILL, THE FIRST LORD.
ADMIRALITY.
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: BUT THEN THE
MINICHARACTERS, SMALLER
SIGNIFICANCE.
JUST AS AN EXAMPLE, ONE,
THAT GRABBED ME IS CHARLES
LAWYER YET, BOSTON
BOOKSELLER.
>> RIGHT.
>> Brown: WHY HIM AS A WAY
IN TO TELL YOUR STORY?
>> YOU KNOW, I WANTED TO
HAVE PASSENGERS WE COULD
SORT OF HOLD HANDS WITH
THROUGH THE ENTIRE VOYAGE.
AND CHARLES LAURIET LEFT ONE
OF THE MOST DETAILED
ACCOUNTS OF ANY OF THE
PASSENGERS.
WHEN I SAY ONE OF THE
ACCOUNTS, I MEAN HE LEFT
MULTIPLE TRACES OF HIS STORY
AND THE HISTORIC RECORDS,
FROM TESTIMONY, A BOOK HE
WROTE, AND AN AMAZING FILING
WITH THE MIXED CLAIMS
COMMISSION AFTER THE WAR.
SO THERE WAS A LOT OF RICH
DETAIL.
BUT ALSO WHAT I REALLY LIKED
ABOUT HIM WAS JUST THE FACT
THAT IN THAT ERA, THE GOLDEN
AGE OF BOOKS AND BOOK
COLLECTING, AND SO FORTH,
THAT A BOOK COLLECTOR COULD
BE FAMOUS, AND RECOGNIZED ON
THE STREET.
AND COULD TRAVEL FIRST CLASS
ON THE CLASSIEST OCEAN LINER
ON THE SEA FOR HIS ANNUAL
BUYING TRIP TO LONDON.
>> Brown: I MENTIONED
MYSTERY.
ONE OF THE GREAT MYSTERIES,
OF COURSE, AS YOU DOCUMENT,
THE BRITISH-- WELL KNEW
SUBMARINES WERE IN THE AREA,
THEY WERE TRACKING.
>> NOT ONLY DID THEY KNOW,
BUT THEY KNEW THIS SUBMARINE
WAS VERY LIKELY TO BE IN
THAT AREA BECAUSE THEY KNEW
EXACTLY WHERE IT WAS HEADED.
>> Brown: BUT THEY DIDN'T
SEND OUT NAVAL PAT RULE TO
GUARD THE LOSE TANYA.
>> WELL, NOR DID THEY TELL
CAPTAIN TURN, THE CAPTAIN OF
THE LOSE TAKENIA, NOR DID
THEY TELL HIM-- LUS TANYA
THAT ANY OF THIS WAS KNOWN.
TH K
PATROL ZONE THAT THE
SUBMARINE WOULD BE OFF
LIVERPOOL WHICH IS WHERE ALL
THE SHIPS WERE HEADED, THEY
ALSO KNEW, THEY ALSO KNEW
THAT THE BIG GERMAN
BROADCASTING CENTER WAS
BROADCASTING THE LUSITANIA'S
COMING AND GOINGS.
>> Brown: WHY DIDN'T THEY
TELL THEM?
WHY DIDN'T THEY DO MORE?
WAS THERE IN SOME SENSE THE
BRITISH WANTING A SHIP TO GO
DOWN TO LURE THE AMERICANS
INTO THE WAR?
>> IT IS A COMPLICATED STORY.
ONE HISTORIAN WHO EARLY ON
WHEN HE WROTE A BOOK ABOUT
THE SPY AGENCY, SUPERSECRET
SPY ENTITY IN THIS BOOK, HE
CONSIDERED THIS THE REASON
LUSITANIA WAS ALLOWED TO
SAIL INTO THE IRISH SEA
UNPROTECTED, BECAUSE IT WAS
A MONUMENTAL COCK-UP T WAS A
MISTAKE.
LATER IN LIFE AS OTHER
EVIDENCE CAME FORWARD, HE
CHANGED HIS MIND.
I FOUND IT FASCINATING.
THERE WAS THIS INTERVIEW ON
FILE IN THE IMPERIAL WAR
MUSEUM IN LONDON WHERE HE
SAYS THAT AS MUCH AS HE
LOVERS THE ROYAL NAVY AND
CALLS HIMSELF A LOVER OF THE
ROYAL NAVY, HE HAD COME TO
THE CONCLUSION THAT THAT
POINT IN HIS LIFE THAT THERE
WAS SOME KIND OF A
CONSPIRACY, THERE WAS
SOMETHING.
BUT HE COULDN'T-- HE JUST
DIDN'T KNOW WHAT KIND.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, THE
BOOK IS DEAD WEIGHT, ERIK
LARSON, THANKS SOME OF.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AND NOW TO OUR
"NEWSHOUR SHARES" OF THE DAY.
SOMETHING THAT CAUGHT OUR EYE
THAT MIGHT BE OF INTEREST TO YOU
TOO.
A RECORD NUMBER OF SEA LION PUPS
HAVE WASHED UP ASHORE IN
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA THIS YEAR,
STARVING AND ABANDONED.
IT'S NOT CLEAR WHY, BUT SOME
SCIENTISTS THINK WARMING WATERS
AND A SHORTAGE OF FISH IS
FORCING THEIR MOTHERS TO SEARCH
LONGER FOR FOOD.
ANIMAL RESCUE TEAMS ARE BRINGING
THE HUNGRY PUPS TO MARINE MAMMAL
CENTERS, WHICH ARE NEARING
CAPACITY.
DAVID BARD, COORDINATOR OF ONE
SUCH CENTER IN SAN PEDRO,
EXPLAINS:
>> WE'RE DOING EVERYTHING WE CAN
TO WORK WITH RESCUE AGENCIES AND
BRING IN AS MANY PATIENTS AS WE
CAN.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS THIS
YEAR, BECAUSE OF THE INORDINATE
NUMBERS, WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE
ABLE TO SAVE EVERY SINGLE ANIMAL
ON THE BEACH.
>> Woodruff: SO FAR THIS SEASON,
MORE THAN A THOUSAND SEA LIONS
HAVE COME ASHORE WITH MORE
EXPECTED EVERY DAY.
AGAIN, THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS OF
THE DAY:
THE BIG ELECTION WIN FOR ISRAELI
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU CAST
DOUBT ON ANY ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
PEACE TALKS.
AND THE FEDERAL RESERVE OPENED
THE DOOR TO RAISING INTEREST
RATES, BUT NOT ANYTIME SOON.
THAT SENT THE DOW INDUSTRIALS
SURGING 230 POINTS.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WHY INVESTORS ARE
BACKING HIGH-TECH DEVICES
DESIGNED FOR BABY BOOMERS.
>> WE FELT BOTH THE DESK-u
TREADMILL SEPARATELY.
35% OF OUR CUSTOMERS ARE
OVER THE AGE OF 45.
>> THIS IS CRUST ONE OF THE
PITCHES BEING MADE A 1776, A
WASHINGTON D.C.-BASED
INCUBATOR OR START-UP
ENTREPRENEURS COME TO SHARE
IDEAS.
>> IT LOOKS LIKE A YOUNG
PERSON'S GAME.
BUT TWO OF AARPs FUTURIST,
JEFFREY AND SANJAY ARE ON
PATROL, HOLDING REGULAR
OFFICE HOURS TO LISTEN
START-UPS PITCH HOW THEY
MIGHT HELP OLDER AMERICANS.
>> OLDER ADULTS COMING INTO
THE POPULATION AND WE HAVE
TO DESIGN FOR THEM.
>> THAT'S TOMORROW ON
>> Ifill: THAT'S TOMORROW ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.